docs/index.rst, before:

.. _dev_index:

Developer Guidelines
====================

This section covers the process to follow for getting your changes into the :term:`prime repository`.
While there are many types of contribution, this section focuses on contributions made using :github:`GitHub<>` and :git:`Git<>`, the version control system.

1. :ref:`Development setup<setup>` : Instructions for getting your own copy of libCellML for development purposes.
#. :ref:`Dependency versions and compatibility<versions>` : Dependencies and requirements for a development set-up.
#. :ref:`Configuring and building libCellML<configure_and_build>` : How to build libCellML from source code.
#. :ref:`Testing libCellML<testing>` : How to test your code without opening a pull request.
#. :ref:`Contributing to libCellML<contributing>` : Getting your code into the libCellML prime repository.
#. :ref:`Review process<review_process>` : Instructions for code review and responding to comments.
#. :ref:`Coding Standards<coding_standards>` : Guidelines for coding style and standards for contributions.
#. :ref:`Glossary<glossary_page>` : Glossary of terminology

.. container:: quicklinks

   :ref:`Development setup<setup>`
   :ref:`Dependency versions and compatibility<versions>`
   :ref:`Configuring and building libCellML<configure_and_build>`
   :ref:`Testing libCellML<testing>`
   :ref:`Contributing to libCellML<contributing>` 
   :ref:`Review Process<review_process>`
   :ref:`Coding Standards<coding_standards>`
   :ref:`Glossary<glossary_page>` 

..
  The following content is automatically generated do not edit between the markers, at some point it will get overwritten.

..
  # CHANGELOG_TOC_START_MARKER

Changelogs
==========

.. toctree::

   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.104
   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.103
   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.102
   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.101
   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.100
   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.99
   changelogs/changelog_v0.2.0
   changelogs/changelog_v0.1.0

..
  # CHANGELOG_TOC_END_MARKER

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :glob:

   *
   changelogs/index

Commit message:

Add documentation for the release process.

docs/index.rst, after:

.. _dev_index:

Developer Guidelines
====================

This section covers the process to follow for getting your changes into the :term:`prime repository`.
While there are many types of contribution, this section focuses on contributions made using :github:`GitHub<>` and :git:`Git<>`, the version control system.

1. :ref:`Development setup<setup>` : Instructions for getting your own copy of libCellML for development purposes.
#. :ref:`Dependency versions and compatibility<versions>` : Dependencies and requirements for a development set-up.
#. :ref:`Configuring and building libCellML<configure_and_build>` : How to build libCellML from source code.
#. :ref:`Testing libCellML<testing>` : How to test your code without opening a pull request.
#. :ref:`Contributing to libCellML<contributing>` : Getting your code into the libCellML prime repository.
#. :ref:`Review process<review_process>` : Instructions for code review and responding to comments.
#. :ref:`Coding standards<coding_standards>` : Guidelines for coding style and standards for contributions.
#. :ref:`Release process<release_process>` : Instructions for making a release of libCellML.
#. :ref:`Glossary<glossary_page>` : Glossary of terminology

.. container:: quicklinks

   :ref:`Development setup<setup>`
   :ref:`Dependency versions and compatibility<versions>`
   :ref:`Configuring and building libCellML<configure_and_build>`
   :ref:`Testing libCellML<testing>`
   :ref:`Contributing to libCellML<contributing>` 
   :ref:`Review process<review_process>`
   :ref:`Coding standards<coding_standards>`
   :ref:`Release process<release_process>`
   :ref:`Glossary<glossary_page>`

..
  The following content is automatically generated do not edit between the markers, at some point it will get overwritten.

..
  # CHANGELOG_TOC_START_MARKER

Changelogs
==========

.. toctree::

   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.104
   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.103
   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.102
   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.101
   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.100
   changelogs/changelog_v0.3.99
   changelogs/changelog_v0.2.0
   changelogs/changelog_v0.1.0

..
  # CHANGELOG_TOC_END_MARKER

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :glob:

   *
   changelogs/index
